ARM STM32L Runtimes
===================

Runtimes Supported
------------------

* Light
* Light-Tasking

Targets Supported
-----------------

Cortex-M33 MCUs

System Clocks
-------------

Clocks Configuration
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

The system clock source is the PLL driven by the internal MSI clock. The
procedure Setup_PLL (setup_pll.adb) configures the MSI to 48 MHz and the PLL
outputs to 110 MHz for the system clock and PLLQ, and 31.4 MHz for PLLP. This
setup can be changed by modifying Setup_PLL. After updating Setup_PLL ensure
the clock constants in System.BB.Board_Parameters (s-bbbopa.ads) are updated to
reflect the new system clock speeds.

Startup Code
------------

The startup code is in multiple assembly language files located in the gnat
subdirectory within the runtime.

There are two assembly language files for the startup code, one each for
executing from RAM or ROM, plus a common file shared by both (e.g., that
starts the FPU). These are files named start-ram.S, start-rom.S, and
common.S, respectively.

The specific startup code is selected by the linker scripts' references to
the unique symbols defined in the assembly files, via the entry point
definitions.

For the ZFP runtime these start-\*.S file is used to initialize the vector
table.

For the Ravenscar runtimes, the vector table is initialized by code in
handler.S. The code in package System.BB.CPU_Primitives (gnat/s-bbcppr.adb)
installs GNAT-specific handlers that raise exceptions for the traps.

Floating-point Co-processor
---------------------------

Package System.BB.Parameters (gnat/s-bbpara.ads) specifies whether a FPU is
present, but this is used in conditional code in the context switch routine,
not to decide whether to enable the FPU. The supported STM32 targets all
have an FPU so the unit is enabled in the common startup code
(start-common.S). If your target does not have an FPU change the assembly
code and the System.BB.Parameters package.

Interrupts
----------

The package Ada.Interrupts.Names (a-intnam.ads) is located in the gnat
directory. This package spec was automatically generated from an SVD file so
you will not need to change it unless an SVD file was unavailable for your
target.

See package System.BB.MCU_Parameters (s-bbmcpa.ads) for the number of
interrupts defined. That number must reflect the contents of the
SVD-generated package Ada.Interrupts.Names.

Memory Layout
-------------

The memory layout is controlled by linker scripts specific to whether the
program is located in RAM or ROM. The scripts are located in the ld
directory and are named common-RAM.ld and common-ROM.ld, respectively.

Script selection is controlled by the selected memory map. The memory maps
themselves are selected by a scenario variable declared in an XML
file named runtime.xml that is located in the runtime root directory. The
scenario variable is used to specify linker switches.

The memory sections' locations and sizes are specified in in the memory-map-*.ld,
files. The -RAM and -ROM suffix in the file name selects if the program is located
in RAM or ROM. No other suffix indicates that this file is intended for devices with
TrustZone support disabled. A -TZ suffix indicates that the program targets a device
with TrustZone support enabled and the SECURE and NONSECURe additions locate it
in the secure or non-secure part of the device respectively.
The XML also specifies these files as part of the linker switches.

You can modify all of these scripts as required. Alternatively, these
scripts can be overridden at link time using the LDSCRIPT environment
variable.

Resources Used
--------------

The Ravenscar runtime libraries use the SysTick interrupt to implement Ada
semantics for time, i.e., delay statements and package Ada.Real_Time. The
SysTick interrupt handler runs at highest priority. See procedure
Sys_Tick_Handler in package body System.BB.CPU_Primitives
(gnat/s-bbcppr.adb), which calls through to the handler in the trap vectors
only when necessary for the sake of efficiency.

The runtime libraries provide a minimal version of package Ada.Text_IO
supporting character- and string-based input and output routines. These are
implemented using ARM semihosting. You can implement board specific Text_IO
that uses on-chip UART by replacing the package System.Text_IO
(gnat/s-textio.adb) with your own board specific package.
